README.md, before:

Cluster Builder
===============

[Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) and [Packer](https://www.packer.io) IaC() scripts to configure [DC/OS](https://dcos.io/), [Docker Swarm](https://www.docker.com/) and [Tectonic CoreOS](https://coreos.com) container orchestration clusters and deploy them into VMware environments using simple Ansible inventory host file declarations and a minimal toolset.

> Deploy a production ready container orchestration cluster to VMware in minutes while you read [hacker news](https://news.ycombinator.com/)...

![Cluster Builder Overview](docs/images/cluster-builder-overview.png)

__cluster-builder__ enables the automated creation of container orchestration clusters for VMware environments.  Using freely available tools and only an annotated Ansible inventory file, __cluster-builder__ allows you to configure and deploy into ESXi (and Fusion) fleets of virtual machine cluster nodes; as completely configured and ready to use CaaS systems.

__cluster-builder__ follows an [immutable infrastructure](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/what-is-immutable-infrastructure) philosophy even at the cluster node level.  Container orchestration clusters are defined in a simple text file and then deployed using a single command.  Always repeatable and documented, this single re-usable toolset can deploy numerous and varied orchestration clusters with a clear separation of configuration and deployment artifacts, while offering a mechanism for managing the various cluster definitions packages.

__cluster-builder__ was designed to handle ~all~ most of the complexity associated with on-prem deployments of [DC/OS](https://dcos.io/), [Docker Swarm](https://www.docker.com/) and [Tectonic CoreOS](https://coreos.com) container orchestration clusters.

1. [Supported Clusters](#supported-clusters)
2. [Deployment Options](#deployment-options)
3. [Required Software](#required-software)
4. [General Preparation](#general-preparation)
5. [Cluster Definition Packages](#cluster-definition-packages)
6. [Cluster Builder Usage](#cluster-builder-usage)
7. [Deploying a Cluster](#deploying-a-cluster)
8. [Patching a Cluster](#patching-a-cluster)
9. [Adding a Node to a Cluster](#adding-a-node-to-a-cluster)
10. [Controlling Cluster VM Nodes](#controlling-cluster-vm-nodes)
11. [VMware ESX Volume Driver Plugin](#vmware-esx-volume-driver-plugin)
12. [Prometheus Monitoring](#prometheus-monitoring)
13. [Host Mounted NFS Storage](#host-mounted-nfs-storage)
14. [Change Cluster Password](#change-cluster-password)
15. [Advanced Swarm Deployment](#advanced-swarm-deployment)
16. [System Profile](#system-profile)

## Supported Clusters
The **cluster-builder** currently supports building __Swarm__, __DC/OS__  and __Tectonic CoreOS__ clusters for several platforms:

* PhotonOS Docker CE
* CentOS 7 Atomic Docker CE (deprecated)
* CentOS 7 Docker CE
* CentOS 7 Docker EE
* CentOS 7 DC/OS
* RedHat Enterprise 7 Docker CE
* RedHat Enterprise 7 Docker EE
* CoreOS Tectonic Kubernetes (see see the [CoreOS Readme](docs/README_CoreOS.md))

> [PhotonOS](https://vmware.github.io/photon/) is VMware's take on a minimal linux container OS.

> [Project Atomic](https://www.projectatomic.io/) variant is now deprecated.  The __rpm-ostree__ model is too restrictive.

## Deployment Options
There are currently two types of deployment:

* VMware Fusion
* VMware ESXi (vSphere)

The VMware Fusion deployment is intended for local development.

VMware ESXi is for staging and production deployments.

There are at present 7 supported cluster types, or variants:

* photon-swarm
* centos-swarm
* rhel-swarm
* centos-ucp
* rhel-ucp
* centos-dcos

> Each variant starts in the **node-packer** and uses _packer_ to build a base VMX/OVA template image from distribution iso.

With two special builds in support of __Tectonic CoreOS__:

* coreos-provisioner
* coreos-pxe

For more information on these [see the CoreOS Readme](docs/README_CoreOS.md)

## Required Software

### macOS / Linux

* VMware Fusion Pro 8+ / Workstation Pro 12+
* VMware ESXi 6.5+ (optional)
* VMware's [ovftool](https://my.vmware.com/web/vmware/details?productId=614&downloadGroup=OVFTOOL420) in $PATH
* Ansible 2.3+ `brew install/upgrade ansible`
* Hashicorp [Packer 1.04+](https://www.packer.io/downloads.html)

> Note: For Docker EE edition you will need to provide a valid Docker EE download URL and license file.

### Windows

There is now experimental Windows support for ESXi deployments. See the [Windows Readme](docs/README_Windows.md).

The [Cluster Builder Control](https://github.com/ids/cluster-builder-control) is also an alternative.  It is a CentOS7 desktop with all the tools required for running **cluster-builder**.

It can be used:

* Running locally on a Windows or Linux VMware Workstation, or VMware Fusion for macOS
* Running remotely on an ESXi server

It can even be built remotely directly on an ESXi server, which is the intended purpose.  For production deployments it can form the foundation for a control station that operates within the ESX environment and is used to centralize management of the clusters.

For instructions see the [Cluster Builder Control](https://github.com/ids/cluster-builder-control) README.

## General Preparation and Deployment Guides

* For all cluster types ensure that the host names specified in the inventory file also resolve.  For ESXi deployments these should resolve via DNS.  For Fusion deployments you can use __/etc/hosts__ on the host, but DNS resolution still works best.

* It is necessary that the **id_rsa.pub** value of the **cluster-builder** operator account be set in the **node-packer/keys/authorized_keys**. This is required as the scripts use passwordless SSH to access the 
VMs for provisioning.

* The cluster provisioning scripts rely on a **VM template OVA** that corresponds to the cluster type.  These are built by packer and located in **node-packer/output_ovas**.  See the cluster node packer [readme](https://github.com/ids/cluster-builder/blob/master/node-packer/README.md).  The **cluster-deploy** script will attempt to build the ova if it isn't found where expected.

__Note for Docker EE__
The cluster definition package (folder) you create in the __clusters__ folder will need to contain a valid __docker_subscription.lic__ file.

__Note for Red Hat Deployments__
The cluster definition package (folder) you create in the __clusters__ folder will need to contain a valid __rhel7-setup.sh__ file and __rhel.lic__ file. Additionally, the ISO needs to be manually downloaded and place in **node-packer/iso**.

See the [Fusion Deployment Guide](docs/fusion_deployment_guide.md) for details on deploying on VMware Fusion.

See the [ESXi Deployment Guide](docs/esxi_deployment_guide.md) for details on deploying to ESXi hypervisor(s).

## Cluster Definition Packages

Everything is based on the **Ansible inventory file**, which defines the cluster specifications. These are defined in **hosts** files located in a folder given the cluster name:

Eg. In the **examples** folder there is:

		demo-centos-swarm
			|_ hosts

Sample cluster packages are located in the **examples** folder and can be copied into the **clusters** folder.

#### VMware Fusion Examples

* [DC/OS in VMware Fusion](examples/demo-centos-dcos/hosts)
* [Docker CE in VMware Fusion](examples/demo-centos-swarm/hosts)
* [Tectonic CoreOS in VMware Fusion - Provisioner](examples/demo-core-provisioner/hosts) and [Clusters](examples/demo-core/hosts).


#### VMware ESXi Examples

* [DC/OS on ESXi](examples/esxi-centos-dcos/hosts)
* [Docker CE on ESXi](examples/esxi-centos-swarm/hosts)
* [Tectonic CoreOS on ESXi - Provisioner](examples/core-provisioner/hosts) and [Clusters](examples/core-1/hosts).

## Cluster Builder Usage

The __cluster-builder__ project is designed as a generic toolset for deployment.  All user specific configuration information is stored in the cluster definition packages which are kept in the __clusters__ folder.

It is recommended that an organization establish a base folder git repository within the __clusters__ folder to store their cluster definition packages.  Anything kept in __clusters__ will be ignored by the parent cluster-builder git repository.

Eg.

	cluster-builder
		|_ clusters
			|_ ids (my organization - git repo - named anything - shorter is better)
				|_ swarm-dev (my cluster definition package)
					|_ hosts (the cluster inventory hosts file)

All resulting artifacts from __cluster-builder__ are then stored within the cluster definition package.

## Deploying a Cluster
To deploy a cluster use **cluster-deploy**:

    $ bash cluster-deploy <inventory-package | cluster-name>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-deploy demo-centos-swarm
    
## Patching a Cluster
To update the nodes on a deployed cluster, use **cluster-update**:

    $ bash cluster-deploy <inventory-package | cluster-name>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-deploy esxi-rhel-swarm

## Adding a Node to a Cluster
To add a new node to an existing cluster, update the original hosts file with the new node.
Then use **cluster-add**:

    $ bash cluster-add <inventory-package | cluster-name>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-add esxi-rhel-swarm

## Controlling Cluster VM Nodes
There are ansible tasks that use the inventory files to execute VM control commands.

Use **cluster-control**:

    bash cluster-control <inventory-package | cluster-name> <action: one of stop|suspend|start|destroy>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-control demo-atomic-swarm suspend


## VMware ESXi Volume Driver Plugin

In order to make use of the VMware Volume Driver Plugin (vDVS) for persistent data volume management the VIB must be installed on all of the ESX servers used for the cluster.

Download the [VIB](https://bintray.com/vmware/vDVS/download_file?file_path=VMWare_bootbank_esx-vmdkops-service_0.19.641f741-0.0.1.vib) for the vDVS.


It is easiest to download the VIB to a shared datastore accessible to all of the ESX servers, and then copy it locally to the /tmp folder during each install.

> Make sure to put the VIB in tmp on the ESX server and reference it absolutely:

Eg.

	esxcli software vib install --no-sig-check -v /tmp/VMWare_bootbank_esx-vmdkops-service_0.20.15f5e1d-0.0.1.vib

The plugin is automatically installed as part of the cluster-builder swarm provisioning process. However, this can also be manually done on cluster nodes with the following command:

	docker plugin install --grant-all-permissions --alias vsphere vmware/docker-volume-vsphere:latest

## Prometheus Monitoring

Currently, __cAdvisor__ and __node-exporter__ are installed on CentOS and PhotonOS Swarms, with metrics enabled by default.

When the following is added to a cluster package hosts file:

docker_prometheus_server=<ansible inventory hostname>

Eg.

	docker_prometheus_server=swarm-m1

Prometheus and Grafana containers will be installed on the specified node.

Promethus can then be reached at: http://<cluster node>:9090

Grafana at: http://<cluster node>:3000

> TODO: These need to be TLS secured and made production ready

## Host Mounted NFS Storage

Place the following file in the cluster definition package folder:

	nfs_shares.yml

In the format:

	nfs_shares:
		- folder: the name of the local mount folder
			fstab: the fstab entry
			group: an inventory group of hosts on which to setup this mount

Eg.

	nfs_shares:
		- folder: /mnt/nfs/shared
			fstab: "192.168.1.10:/Users/seanhig/NFS_SharedStorage  /mnt/nfs/shared   nfs      rw,sync,hard,intr  0     0"
			group: "docker_swarm_worker"
		- folder: /mnt/nfs/shared
			fstab: "192.168.1.10:/Users/seanhig/Google\\040Drive/Backups/NFS_Backups  /mnt/nfs/backups   nfs      rw,sync,hard,intr  0     0"   
			group: "docker_swarm_worker"
    
And then run the ansible playbook for the platform:

Eg.

	ansible-playbook -i clusters/esxi-photon-swarm/hosts ansible/photon-nfs-shares.yml

or

	ansible-playbook -i clusters/esxi-centos-swarm/hosts ansible/centos-nfs-shares.yml

And it will setup the mounts according to host group membership specified in the nfs_shares.yml configuration.

## Change Cluster Password
Change password is now integrated into the cluster deployment process.

For __CentOS__ deployments, both the __root__ and __admin__ passwords are prompted for change at the end of the cluster deployment.

For __PhotonOS__ deployments, only the __root__ will prompt.

> A bit of an annoyance, but it is integrated to ensure that clusters are never deployed into production with default root passwords.  TODO: Enhance to support headless deployments.

This functionality is also available as as top level script:

	bash cluster-passwd <cluster package> [user to change]

Eg.

	bash cluster-passwd esxi-centos-swarm admin

It is intended to be run on a regular basis as per the standard operating procedures for password change management.

## Advanced Swarm Deployment

The advanced swarm deployment configuration represents the current candidate production deployment model.  It involves the following key aspects:

* [Separate interfaces for Control and Data plane](docs/swarm_seperate_interfaces.md) underlay networks (each VM node in the swarm has two nics on two different subnets)
* Cluster VM nodes are fully contained within a private VLAN
* All cluster access is controlled via a Firewall/gateway
* All management services are load balanced over 3 or more manager nodes
* All management services are secured by HTTPS

For detailed step-by-step configuration instructions see the [Advanced Swarm Deployment Guide](docs/advanced_swarm.md)

## System Profile

A general overview of the highlights:

### Docker Versions

__Docker CE:__ 17.09.1-ce (or later)
centos-swarm
photon-swarm
atomic-swarm
rhel-swarm

__Docker EE:__ 2.2.3 (ucp)
centos-ucp
rhel-ucp

__DC/OS__: 1.11 (or latest)
centos-dcos

__Tectonic CoreOS__: v1.8.9 (or latest)
coreos-provisioner
coreos-pxe

### CentOS Based Clusters

* CentOS base VM image OVA template is based on the CentOS 7 Minimal 1708 iso and is  __1.1GB__, and contains one thinly provisioned SCSI based VMDK disk using __overlay2__, which is now supported on 1708 (CentOS/RHEL 7.4+).
* CentOS base VM image is a fully functioning and ready worker node.
* Default linux kernel is 3.10.x

### PhotonOS Based Clusters

* PhotonOS base VM image OVA template is based on the PhotonOS 2 Minimal iso and is  __862.4MB__, and contains one thinly provisioned SCSI based VMDK disk: 250GB dynamically sizing system block device.
* PhotonOS VMs are based on Photon OS 2.0 (current), and have a 4.9 (or better) linux kernel
* PhotonOS VMs are automatically configured with __overlay2__ driver as they have a 4.x kernel

### All Clusters

* Use __packer centric__ approach for provisioning, VM OVA based nodes are ready to be added to swarms
* The __VMware Docker Volume Service__ Docker Volume Plugin has been pre-installed on all Swarm based cluster-builder VMs.
* Time synchronization of all the cluster nodes is done as part of the deployment process, and __chronyd__ or __ntpd__ services are configured and verified.
* Deployments can include configurable options for log shipping to ELK, using logstash.  Docker EE/UCP can also be configured to ship to __syslogd__ server post-deployment.
* Metrics are enabled (a configurable option), and cAdvisor/node-exporter options are available for deployment in support of Prometheus/Grafana monitoring for Docker Swarm.  Tectonic CoreOS has built in Prometheus/Grafana integrations for Kubernetes that are quite a bit more advanced then the Swarm implementation.
* Remote API and TLS certificates are installed and configured on Docker CE deployments, enabling a unified application stack deployment model for both Docker EE and CE clusters.

> Note that all details pertaining to the above exist within this codebase. The cluster-builder starts with the distribution iso file in the initial [node-packer](node-packer) phase, and everything from the initial __kickstart__ install through to the final __ansible playbook__ are documented here and available for review.

Commit message:

added targetd-server example and documentation for CoreOS iscsi

README.md, after:

Cluster Builder
===============

[Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) and [Packer](https://www.packer.io) IaC() scripts to configure [DC/OS](https://dcos.io/), [Docker Swarm](https://www.docker.com/) and [Tectonic CoreOS](https://coreos.com) container orchestration clusters and deploy them into VMware environments using simple Ansible inventory host file declarations and a minimal toolset.

> Deploy a production ready container orchestration cluster to VMware in minutes while you read [hacker news](https://news.ycombinator.com/)...

![Cluster Builder Overview](docs/images/cluster-builder-overview.png)

__cluster-builder__ enables the automated creation of container orchestration clusters for VMware environments.  Using freely available tools and only an annotated Ansible inventory file, __cluster-builder__ allows you to configure and deploy into ESXi (and Fusion) fleets of virtual machine cluster nodes; as completely configured and ready to use CaaS systems.

__cluster-builder__ follows an [immutable infrastructure](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/what-is-immutable-infrastructure) philosophy even at the cluster node level.  Container orchestration clusters are defined in a simple text file and then deployed using a single command.  Always repeatable and documented, this single re-usable toolset can deploy numerous and varied orchestration clusters with a clear separation of configuration and deployment artifacts, while offering a mechanism for managing the various cluster definitions packages.

__cluster-builder__ was designed to handle ~all~ most of the complexity associated with on-prem deployments of [DC/OS](https://dcos.io/), [Docker Swarm](https://www.docker.com/) and [Tectonic CoreOS](https://coreos.com) container orchestration clusters.

1. [Supported Clusters](#supported-clusters)
2. [Deployment Options](#deployment-options)
3. [Required Software](#required-software)
4. [General Preparation](#general-preparation)
5. [Cluster Definition Packages](#cluster-definition-packages)
6. [Cluster Builder Usage](#cluster-builder-usage)
7. [Deploying a Cluster](#deploying-a-cluster)
8. [Patching a Cluster](#patching-a-cluster)
9. [Adding a Node to a Cluster](#adding-a-node-to-a-cluster)
10. [Controlling Cluster VM Nodes](#controlling-cluster-vm-nodes)
11. [VMware Docker Volume Storage Driver](#vmware-docker-volume-storage-driver)
12. [CoreOS iSCSI Provisioner and Targetd Storage Appliance](#coreos-iscsi-provisioner-and-targetd-storage-appliance)
13. [Prometheus Monitoring](#prometheus-monitoring)
14. [Host Mounted NFS Storage](#host-mounted-nfs-storage)
15. [Change Cluster Password](#change-cluster-password)
16. [Advanced Swarm Deployment](#advanced-swarm-deployment)
17. [System Profile](#system-profile)

## Supported Clusters
The **cluster-builder** currently supports building __Swarm__, __DC/OS__  and __Tectonic CoreOS__ clusters for several platforms:

* PhotonOS Docker CE
* CentOS 7 Atomic Docker CE (deprecated)
* CentOS 7 Docker CE
* CentOS 7 Docker EE
* CentOS 7 DC/OS
* RedHat Enterprise 7 Docker CE
* RedHat Enterprise 7 Docker EE
* CoreOS Tectonic Kubernetes (see see the [CoreOS Readme](docs/README_CoreOS.md))

> [PhotonOS](https://vmware.github.io/photon/) is VMware's take on a minimal linux container OS.

> [Project Atomic](https://www.projectatomic.io/) variant is now deprecated.  The __rpm-ostree__ model is too restrictive.

## Deployment Options
There are currently two types of deployment:

* VMware Fusion
* VMware ESXi (vSphere)

The VMware Fusion deployment is intended for local development.

VMware ESXi is for staging and production deployments.

There are at present 7 supported cluster types, or variants:

* photon-swarm
* centos-swarm
* rhel-swarm
* centos-ucp
* rhel-ucp
* centos-dcos

> Each variant starts in the **node-packer** and uses _packer_ to build a base VMX/OVA template image from distribution iso.

With two special builds in support of __Tectonic CoreOS__:

* coreos-provisioner
* coreos-pxe

For more information on these [see the CoreOS Readme](docs/README_CoreOS.md)

## Required Software

### macOS / Linux

* VMware Fusion Pro 8+ / Workstation Pro 12+
* VMware ESXi 6.5+ (optional)
* VMware's [ovftool](https://my.vmware.com/web/vmware/details?productId=614&downloadGroup=OVFTOOL420) in $PATH
* Ansible 2.3+ `brew install/upgrade ansible`
* Hashicorp [Packer 1.04+](https://www.packer.io/downloads.html)

> Note: For Docker EE edition you will need to provide a valid Docker EE download URL and license file.

### Windows

There is now experimental Windows support for ESXi deployments. See the [Windows Readme](docs/README_Windows.md).

The [Cluster Builder Control](https://github.com/ids/cluster-builder-control) is also an alternative.  It is a CentOS7 desktop with all the tools required for running **cluster-builder**.

It can be used:

* Running locally on a Windows or Linux VMware Workstation, or VMware Fusion for macOS
* Running remotely on an ESXi server

It can even be built remotely directly on an ESXi server, which is the intended purpose.  For production deployments it can form the foundation for a control station that operates within the ESX environment and is used to centralize management of the clusters.

For instructions see the [Cluster Builder Control](https://github.com/ids/cluster-builder-control) README.

## General Preparation and Deployment Guides

* For all cluster types ensure that the host names specified in the inventory file also resolve.  For ESXi deployments these should resolve via DNS.  For Fusion deployments you can use __/etc/hosts__ on the host, but DNS resolution still works best.

* It is necessary that the **id_rsa.pub** value of the **cluster-builder** operator account be set in the **node-packer/keys/authorized_keys**. This is required as the scripts use passwordless SSH to access the 
VMs for provisioning.

* The cluster provisioning scripts rely on a **VM template OVA** that corresponds to the cluster type.  These are built by packer and located in **node-packer/output_ovas**.  See the cluster node packer [readme](https://github.com/ids/cluster-builder/blob/master/node-packer/README.md).  The **cluster-deploy** script will attempt to build the ova if it isn't found where expected.

__Note for Docker EE__
The cluster definition package (folder) you create in the __clusters__ folder will need to contain a valid __docker_subscription.lic__ file.

__Note for Red Hat Deployments__
The cluster definition package (folder) you create in the __clusters__ folder will need to contain a valid __rhel7-setup.sh__ file and __rhel.lic__ file. Additionally, the ISO needs to be manually downloaded and place in **node-packer/iso**.

See the [Fusion Deployment Guide](docs/fusion_deployment_guide.md) for details on deploying on VMware Fusion.

See the [ESXi Deployment Guide](docs/esxi_deployment_guide.md) for details on deploying to ESXi hypervisor(s).

## Cluster Definition Packages

Everything is based on the **Ansible inventory file**, which defines the cluster specifications. These are defined in **hosts** files located in a folder given the cluster name:

Eg. In the **examples** folder there is:

		demo-centos-swarm
			|_ hosts

Sample cluster packages are located in the **examples** folder and can be copied into the **clusters** folder.

#### VMware Fusion Examples

* [DC/OS in VMware Fusion](examples/demo-centos-dcos/hosts)
* [Docker CE in VMware Fusion](examples/demo-centos-swarm/hosts)
* [Tectonic CoreOS in VMware Fusion - Provisioner](examples/demo-core-provisioner/hosts) and [Clusters](examples/demo-core/hosts).


#### VMware ESXi Examples

* [DC/OS on ESXi](examples/esxi-centos-dcos/hosts)
* [Docker CE on ESXi](examples/esxi-centos-swarm/hosts)
* [Tectonic CoreOS on ESXi - Provisioner](examples/core-provisioner/hosts) and [Clusters](examples/core-1/hosts).

## Cluster Builder Usage

The __cluster-builder__ project is designed as a generic toolset for deployment.  All user specific configuration information is stored in the cluster definition packages which are kept in the __clusters__ folder.

It is recommended that an organization establish a base folder git repository within the __clusters__ folder to store their cluster definition packages.  Anything kept in __clusters__ will be ignored by the parent cluster-builder git repository.

Eg.

	cluster-builder
		|_ clusters
			|_ ids (my organization - git repo - named anything - shorter is better)
				|_ swarm-dev (my cluster definition package)
					|_ hosts (the cluster inventory hosts file)

All resulting artifacts from __cluster-builder__ are then stored within the cluster definition package.

## Deploying a Cluster
To deploy a cluster use **cluster-deploy**:

    $ bash cluster-deploy <inventory-package | cluster-name>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-deploy demo-centos-swarm
    
## Patching a Cluster
To update the nodes on a deployed cluster, use **cluster-update**:

    $ bash cluster-deploy <inventory-package | cluster-name>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-deploy esxi-rhel-swarm

## Adding a Node to a Cluster
To add a new node to an existing cluster, update the original hosts file with the new node.
Then use **cluster-add**:

    $ bash cluster-add <inventory-package | cluster-name>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-add esxi-rhel-swarm

## Controlling Cluster VM Nodes
There are ansible tasks that use the inventory files to execute VM control commands.

Use **cluster-control**:

    bash cluster-control <inventory-package | cluster-name> <action: one of stop|suspend|start|destroy>

Eg.

    $ bash cluster-control demo-atomic-swarm suspend


## VMware Docker Storage Volume Driver Plugin

In order to make use of the VMware Volume Driver Plugin (vDVS) for persistent data volume management the VIB must be installed on all of the ESX servers used for the cluster.

Download the [VIB](https://bintray.com/vmware/vDVS/download_file?file_path=VMWare_bootbank_esx-vmdkops-service_0.19.641f741-0.0.1.vib) for the vDVS.


It is easiest to download the VIB to a shared datastore accessible to all of the ESX servers, and then copy it locally to the /tmp folder during each install.

> Make sure to put the VIB in tmp on the ESX server and reference it absolutely:

Eg.

	esxcli software vib install --no-sig-check -v /tmp/VMWare_bootbank_esx-vmdkops-service_0.20.15f5e1d-0.0.1.vib

The plugin is automatically installed as part of the cluster-builder swarm provisioning process. However, this can also be manually done on cluster nodes with the following command:

	docker plugin install --grant-all-permissions --alias vsphere vmware/docker-volume-vsphere:latest

## CoreOS iSCSI Provisioner and Targetd Storage Appliance

As Kubernetes provides native storage support for __iSCSI__ and __NFS__, the cleanest most efficient path to providing __persistent volume ReadWriteOnce__ storage is to leverage iSCSI.

The __cluster-builder__ CoreOS deployment is paired with a __Targetd Server Appliance__ VM that can provide dyanmically provisioned __PVCs__ to Kubernetes deployments using the __open-iscsi__ platform.

For details see the [CoreOS iSCSI Storage Guide](docs/coreos-iscsi-storage.md)

## Prometheus Monitoring

Currently, __cAdvisor__ and __node-exporter__ are installed on CentOS and PhotonOS Swarms, with metrics enabled by default.

When the following is added to a cluster package hosts file:

docker_prometheus_server=<ansible inventory hostname>

Eg.

	docker_prometheus_server=swarm-m1

Prometheus and Grafana containers will be installed on the specified node.

Promethus can then be reached at: http://<cluster node>:9090

Grafana at: http://<cluster node>:3000

> TODO: These need to be TLS secured and made production ready

## Host Mounted NFS Storage

Place the following file in the cluster definition package folder:

	nfs_shares.yml

In the format:

	nfs_shares:
		- folder: the name of the local mount folder
			fstab: the fstab entry
			group: an inventory group of hosts on which to setup this mount

Eg.

	nfs_shares:
		- folder: /mnt/nfs/shared
			fstab: "192.168.1.10:/Users/seanhig/NFS_SharedStorage  /mnt/nfs/shared   nfs      rw,sync,hard,intr  0     0"
			group: "docker_swarm_worker"
		- folder: /mnt/nfs/shared
			fstab: "192.168.1.10:/Users/seanhig/Google\\040Drive/Backups/NFS_Backups  /mnt/nfs/backups   nfs      rw,sync,hard,intr  0     0"   
			group: "docker_swarm_worker"
    
And then run the ansible playbook for the platform:

Eg.

	ansible-playbook -i clusters/esxi-photon-swarm/hosts ansible/photon-nfs-shares.yml

or

	ansible-playbook -i clusters/esxi-centos-swarm/hosts ansible/centos-nfs-shares.yml

And it will setup the mounts according to host group membership specified in the nfs_shares.yml configuration.

## Change Cluster Password
Change password is now integrated into the cluster deployment process.

For __CentOS__ deployments, both the __root__ and __admin__ passwords are prompted for change at the end of the cluster deployment.

For __PhotonOS__ deployments, only the __root__ will prompt.

> A bit of an annoyance, but it is integrated to ensure that clusters are never deployed into production with default root passwords.  TODO: Enhance to support headless deployments.

This functionality is also available as as top level script:

	bash cluster-passwd <cluster package> [user to change]

Eg.

	bash cluster-passwd esxi-centos-swarm admin

It is intended to be run on a regular basis as per the standard operating procedures for password change management.

## Advanced Swarm Deployment

The advanced swarm deployment configuration represents the current candidate production deployment model.  It involves the following key aspects:

* [Separate interfaces for Control and Data plane](docs/swarm_seperate_interfaces.md) underlay networks (each VM node in the swarm has two nics on two different subnets)
* Cluster VM nodes are fully contained within a private VLAN
* All cluster access is controlled via a Firewall/gateway
* All management services are load balanced over 3 or more manager nodes
* All management services are secured by HTTPS

For detailed step-by-step configuration instructions see the [Advanced Swarm Deployment Guide](docs/advanced_swarm.md)

## System Profile

A general overview of the highlights:

### Docker Versions

__Docker CE:__ 17.09.1-ce (or later)
centos-swarm
photon-swarm
atomic-swarm
rhel-swarm

__Docker EE:__ 2.2.3 (ucp)
centos-ucp
rhel-ucp

__DC/OS__: 1.11 (or latest)
centos-dcos

__Tectonic CoreOS__: v1.8.9 (or latest)
coreos-provisioner
coreos-pxe

### CentOS Based Clusters

* CentOS base VM image OVA template is based on the CentOS 7 Minimal 1708 iso and is  __1.1GB__, and contains one thinly provisioned SCSI based VMDK disk using __overlay2__, which is now supported on 1708 (CentOS/RHEL 7.4+).
* CentOS base VM image is a fully functioning and ready worker node.
* Default linux kernel is 3.10.x

### PhotonOS Based Clusters

* PhotonOS base VM image OVA template is based on the PhotonOS 2 Minimal iso and is  __862.4MB__, and contains one thinly provisioned SCSI based VMDK disk: 250GB dynamically sizing system block device.
* PhotonOS VMs are based on Photon OS 2.0 (current), and have a 4.9 (or better) linux kernel
* PhotonOS VMs are automatically configured with __overlay2__ driver as they have a 4.x kernel

### All Clusters

* Use __packer centric__ approach for provisioning, VM OVA based nodes are ready to be added to swarms
* The __VMware Docker Volume Service__ Docker Volume Plugin has been pre-installed on all Swarm based cluster-builder VMs.
* Time synchronization of all the cluster nodes is done as part of the deployment process, and __chronyd__ or __ntpd__ services are configured and verified.
* Deployments can include configurable options for log shipping to ELK, using logstash.  Docker EE/UCP can also be configured to ship to __syslogd__ server post-deployment.
* Metrics are enabled (a configurable option), and cAdvisor/node-exporter options are available for deployment in support of Prometheus/Grafana monitoring for Docker Swarm.  Tectonic CoreOS has built in Prometheus/Grafana integrations for Kubernetes that are quite a bit more advanced then the Swarm implementation.
* Remote API and TLS certificates are installed and configured on Docker CE deployments, enabling a unified application stack deployment model for both Docker EE and CE clusters.

> Note that all details pertaining to the above exist within this codebase. The cluster-builder starts with the distribution iso file in the initial [node-packer](node-packer) phase, and everything from the initial __kickstart__ install through to the final __ansible playbook__ are documented here and available for review.
